---
title: Claude AI as a language learning companion
shorttitle: Claude AI as a language learning companion
slug: claude-ai-hindi
date: 01/06/2025
thumbnail: '/thumbnails/hindi.png'
tag: llm
canonicalUrl: 'https://sanjaycnagi.com/blog/claude-ai-hindi/'
---

As I am writing this, I'm sat in the back of my cousins car, driving through the chaotic, cacophonous streets of Ludhiana, a large, sprawling city in the heart of the Indian state of Punjab. I am midway through a trip to visit family here, a trip that I tend to make every year or two. My father moved to England from Punjab in the early 1980s. It was only ever intended to be a temporary visit, but there he has remained ever since, building a life, career and family, far away from home. Whilst we visited India when we were young, me and my siblings never had the chance to learn our father's two native tongues, Punjabi and Hindi. This was something I have always felt compelled to address. 

Since submitting my [PhD thesis](https://archive.lstmed.ac.uk/23310/) two years ago, I've been learning Hindi, primarily through online tutoring on [Preply](https://preply.com/). Progress has been steady, despite the fact I'm terrible at doing homework set by my tutor (if you are reading, I’m sorry, Shivaani!). I've recently found a tool, however, which has revolutionised my learning - using an large language model, Claude, as a personal language tutor and learning companion. 

Claude is a family of large language models (LLM) developed by Anthropic, many of which are currently world-leading. LLMs have emerged in recent years, creating enormous interest for their potential to transform many aspects of daily life. These AI models are trained on vast amounts of text data, allowing them to understand context and relationships between words, which enables them to perform tasks like writing, answering questions, translation, and programming. In this post, I'll share how I've been using Claude to help me learn Hindi.

One of its biggest strengths lies in its ability to generate engaging learning materials. I first started using generative AI for Hindi with OpenAIs ChatGPT, where I used it to my generate stories which I could then translate for practice. It's fun, because you can personalise them, and then read the story as you translate (my personal favourite was the story of Sanjay, a cricketer for India who moonlighted as a Bollywood actor 😅, until one day, his secret was discovered). This was with an earlier model (GPT-3.5), and the stories would contain many small mistakes, which my tutor would need to correct before I started. Now when I do this with Claude Sonnet 3.5, the stories are essentially mistake-free. Beyond stories, it helps to create personalised homework assignments and other translation exercises tailored to my learning needs.

I've found it incredibly useful for breaking down complex grammar structures. It can offer multiple perspectives until the concept resonates, and provides detailed explanations accompanied by practical examples. Each sentence can be analyzed word by word, with both literal and natural translations described to enhance my understanding. Typically, I’ve found finding this information online to be super difficult. 

Day to day, my family actually speaks Punjabi to each other rather than Hindi. Although they can understand me speaking Hindi, this can make it quite difficult for me to understand them. I’ve found Claude super helpful for this, because I can ask it to give me the Punjabi version of a phrase in Hindi. It is also able to easily switch between scripts (For example, Devanagari and Latin script). And most importantly, unlike any normal tutor or learning buddy, Claude is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and responds immediately. It responds thoughtfully, and never judges when responding, giving the user freedom to continue asking questions until understanding arrives. 

I suspect that whilst LLMs are particularly useful at a beginner level (which I am), as you get more and more proficient in a language, their utility will decrease. And of course, there is only so much a text-based tutor can help with learning a language - nothing will replace real time conversation with native speakers. The nuances of pronunciation, the rhythm of natural conversation, and the subtle cultural clues that emerge through face-to-face interaction remain essential components of achieving fluency. 

While I'm still early in my Hindi learning journey, I'm excited to see how AI tools like Claude continue to evolve as learning companions. As an example of this evolution, Duolingo now have a new subscription tier, [Duolingo Max](https://blog.duolingo.com/duolingo-max/), powered by GPT-4. If you're interested in learning more about Claude and the future of LLMs, I'd recommend having a [play around](https://claude.ai/new), or listening to this episode of the Lex Fridman [podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/69V7CtdbB8blcxNPXvpnmk?si=AEsAvzaKQ3iZZp6qA0d8YA), with the CEO of Anthropic, Dario Amodei, Amanda Askell (a philosopher at Anthropic), and Chris Olah. The section with Amanda Askell is particularly captivating.